docs: add frontend UI and usability guide (#999)
ElektraInitiative/PermaplanT: doc/guidelines/frontend-ui-usability-guide.md

### User Experience (UX)

> Combination of user's perceptions and responses that result from the use and/or anticipated use of a system, product or service.

## Guidelines

### Text

- **Alignment**

  - Left align when text spans over more than three lines because centered text becomes hard to follow when having to jump to the next line multiple times.
  - Avoid mixing two different alignments in a text section, e.g. a centered headline should be followed by centered text.

- **Hierarchies / lists**

  - Avoid using more than two different font sizes.
  - Use bold text and colours for deeper nested hierarchies.

- **Spacing / margin**  
  Multiplier strategy to calculate the margins - if in doubt, use a multiplier of 2, e.g.:

  - Text sections:  
    headline-1 <- 16px -> text <- 32px -> headline-2
  - Navigation bar:  
    logo <- 48px -> navigation-link-1 <- 24px -> navigation-link-2 <- 24px -> navigation-link-3

- **Line height**  
  The bigger the text the smaller the line height's value should be.

  - Headings: 1.1 - 1.3
  - Running text: 1.3 - 1.5

- **Letter spacing**  

>   Often times, like in PermaplanT's current case, the default value (in Tailwind: _tracking-normal_) is good enough.

Reviewer: Maybe use code as then you still have emphasize available for other uses:

```suggestion
  Often times, like in PermaplanT's current case, the default value (in Tailwind: `tracking-normal`) is good enough.
```

  - Running text: usually can be left as is but, if needed, can be set to _tracking-wide_ or _tracking-wider_

### Colors

PermaplanT uses following **three colour palettes**:

- **Neutral** ~60% (PermaplanT: gray): **dominant** colour of the design, e.g. used for background, text and labels
- **Primary** ~30% (PermaplanT: asparagus green): PermaplanT's **main brand** colour, e.g. used for buttons, hovering, highlighting focused input fields
- **Secondary** ~10% (PermaplanT: sea blue): PermaplanT's **second brand** colour, e.g. used for highlighting a few UI elements (e.g. in the layers section) and action-texts

**Only those** three colour palettes **should be used** throughout the whole application. The ratio of their current usage in PermaplanT is conforming nicely to the popular **60-30-10** design rule.

### Forms

#### Design

- Display a **centered heading** if the form is representing a whole page, e.g. PermaplanT's forms to create maps and seeds.
- Add a **capitalized label** above each field.
- **Align** labels to the **left** of their corresponding fields.

> - Always explicitly **associate** the **label with** the belonging **element** by using the label's _for_ attribute (in React: _htmlFor_).

Reviewer: Sentence complicated and bold formatting seems to me overused here.

>   This enables focusing the input field by clicking/tapping on the label.

Reviewer: Maybe add something like this (everywhere where rationale is given) to make the guideline easier to read:

```suggestion
  _Rationale:_ This enables focusing the input field by clicking/tapping on the label.
```

  It also adds screen reader support.

> - All input fields should have the **same styling**, i.e. border, colour, text size, padding, etc.

Reviewer: Yes, please elaborate which styling.

- Use **opacity** for an input field's **placeholder** text.

#### Error Prevention

- Use the **corresponding _type_** of the input field, e.g. _date_ for date fields, _number_ for numerical-only inputs etc.

> - Mark required fields with an **asterisk**.

Reviewer: Color etc..

- Use HTML-native **constraint** attributes for input fields where appropriate, e.g. _maxlength_, _required_, _step_, etc.
- Use short **placeholder** texts for input fields to show allowed values or further explain the intent of the input field.
- Users should **never** be **required** to manually enter a **metrical** unit or a **currency** symbol.
  Instead, make the unit part of the input field itself or leave it out if it's clear from the context.
- **Submission** to the backend should not happen until all fields are **verified** by the **frontend** logic.

> - **Double submission** should be **prevented**, e.g. by disabling the submission button until the server has responded.

Reviewer: Are there other good options?

```suggestion
- **Double submission** should be **prevented** by disabling the submission button until the server has responded.
```

### Consistency

Things with the **same meaning** should **look and behave** the **same** throughout the whole application.
Users should never be uncertain if different words mean the same thing or different actions trigger the same process.

Examples:

> - Call-to-action buttons should look the same everywhere.

Reviewer: How? (For all these examples)

- The layout of forms and the styling of their input fields should be the same in every form.
- Validation errors in forms should be rendered the same way in any form.

> - Toast errors should always be shown in the same location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Toast errors should always be shown on the top right.
```

- Headings of different pages should be positioned in the same location and have the same styling.
- The same application-specific terms should be used everywhere to communicate to the user.

### Icons

- In their **passive**, i.e. currently not active/enabled, state they should appear in **neutral** colours/colourless.

> - When **active**, i.e. currently activated/enabled, they should get a small **highlighting** through a visually stronger and more colourful appearance by using the design's primary/secondary colours.

Reviewer: when primary when secondary?

- When **disabled**, i.e. currently not clickable, they should be **greyed-out**, either via decreasing its opacity or choosing light, faint colours.  

>   The mouse **cursor** should be styled with the **_not-allowed_** css property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The mouse cursor should be styled with the `not-allowed` CSS property.
```

> - A **tooltip** on hovering should be displayed for every icon in PermaplanT's toolbox.

Reviewer: Can you please define must/should(as needed) for all the guidelines.

```suggestion
- A **tooltip** on hovering must be displayed for every icon in PermaplanT's toolbox.
```

  The tooltip should contain the icon's **label** (as concise as possible) and, if existing, the assigned **shortcut**.

### Highlighting

Highlighting techniques:

- Font weight:

  - **Bold** text adds tolerable noise to the design and enables distinct highlighting in both short and long texts.
    In general, it is the preferred highlighting technique to use.
  - _Italic_ text adds minimal noise to the design, but lacks in recognizability.
  - <u>Underlining</u> adds most noise and compromises a text's legibility.

>     It should hardly ever be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It shouldn't be used.
```

- Colours: primary and secondary colours of the design's colour palette

- Images: users generally remember images better than words

- Avoid different fonts for highlighting purposes.

### Wording

Messages shown to the user should strive to fulfill following criteria:

- **concise**: the more text the less likely it will be read by the user
- **clear**: straight to the message's essence
- **understandable** for technical laymen: no error codes or technical terms
- **no exclamation** marks: interpreted as commanding
- **no uppercase** words: comes across as shouting
- **detailed** information should be hidden behind a **read more** link or a **collapsed** section
- **Headlines**, **sub-headlines** and **labels** should be **capitalized**
- **Minimize hyphenation** of words

> ### Error Messages

Reviewer: Overlap to the other UI document, can you move it here? Do we really want everything in one document?

In general, error messages often convey the impression that an application's stability is weak which, in consequence, leads to a **declined user experience**.
Error messages should **only** be used **if** the **user**, without that information, **would be badly surprised** by the result of an action.

Error messages should fulfill following criteria:

- **polite** and **neutral**: do not directly or indirectly blame the user and stay away from jokes
- **brief**
- **specific** to the problem
- contain **reason for the problem**

> - **solution-oriented**: ideally, a solution to the occurred problem is offered

Reviewer: This is dangerous: Solutions should be only offered if you are sure about the solution.

> - no **privacy-violating** information: e.g. informing the user upon a failed login that the entered email does not exist in the system - this could additionally also encourage people to scan our database for emails

Reviewer: As keycloak (hopefully) already does this for us, I don't think we need this guideline.

### Search Fields

> To prevent _Chromium_ and _WebKit_ based browsers from adding their own cross icon and functionality into search input fields, **do not declare** input fields with **type _search_**.  

Reviewer: Start with important+general information, rationale+details later.

```suggestion
Do not declare input fields with type `search`.
_Rationale:_  To prevent _Chromium_ and _WebKit_ based browsers from adding their own cross icon and functionality into search input fields.
```

> Instead, **use** PermaplanT's **SearchInput** component which renders its own cross icon, together with a search icon and the input field itself.  

Reviewer: Why is "use" bold?

```suggestion
Instead, we use PermaplanT's **SearchInput** component which renders its own cross icon, together with a search icon and the input field itself.  
```

That way we provide the same search input functionality for every browser.

The **SearchInput** component has following **behavior** and **functionality**:

- The cross icon will be shown if there is any search term entered into the input field, and hidden otherwise.
- Clicking on the cross icon will reset the current search term and keep the focus on the input field, so the user can continue typing.
- Pressing the _ESC_ key likewise resets the current search term and keeps the focus on the input field.

> - The _SearchInput_ component exposes a method which enables parent components to set the focus on it, besides that it is fully encapsulated, i.e. it hides all its DOM nodes from the outside.

Reviewer: This should probably better be in the components description, shouldn't it?
